Title: Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.21680v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Feb 2026 01:45:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

David Eckel * 1 Henri Mee├¤ 1

# Abstract 

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learn-ing (MARL) solves complex tasks that require coordination from multiple agents, but is often limited to either local (independent learning) or global (centralized learning) perspectives. In this paper, we introduce a novel sequential training scheme and MARL architecture, which learns from multiple perspectives on different hierarchy levels. We propose the Hierarchical Lead Critic (HLC) - inspired by natural emerging distribu-tions in team structures, where following high-level objectives combines with low-level execu-tion. HLC demonstrates that introducing multi-ple hierarchies, leveraging local and global per-spectives, can lead to improved performance with high sample efficiency and robust policies. Ex-perimental results conducted on cooperative, non-communicative, and partially observable MARL benchmarks demonstrate that HLC outperforms single hierarchy baselines and scales robustly with increasing amounts of agents and difficulty. 

# 1. Introduction 

Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) addresses tasks that require coordinated behavior among multiple agents operating in shared environments, often paired with with partially observability. While recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods (Wen et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024; Mahjoub et al., 2025) leverage centralized infor-mation during training following the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) paradigm (Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016), they typically optimize from a single perspectiveŌĆöeither purely local (independent learning) or purely global (centralized learning). This overlooks, that for achieving a high-level objective often the individual agents need to learn a reasonable low-level policy first before op-timizing execution. Following the idea that a team where individuals struggle to perform basic tasks will likely fail to 

> 1

Fraunhofer Institute IVI, Ingolstadt, Germany. Correspon-dence to: David Eckel <david.eckel@ivi.fraunhofer.de >.

Preprint. February 26, 2026. 

Figure 1. Hierarchical Lead Critic (HLC) structure. Agents are evaluated by all related critics (local critics and Lead Critics) se-quentially. 

effectively solve the given overall. We introduce the Hierarchical Lead Critic (HLC), a MARL architecture paired with a sequential training scheme that learns from multiple perspectives across hierarchy levels. HLC organizes agents into groups, each guided by a Lead Critic that aggregates local observationŌĆōaction information and provides group-level value estimates, while also retain-ing local critics at the agent level; note that a fully central-ized critic is a special case of a Lead Critic with maximal receptive field. Figure 1 illustrates how agents are evaluated by their related critics (local and Lead Critics). Central to HLC is a nested sequential update procedure. For each selected agent, we update its policy sequentially across its related critics, ordered by increasing receptive field, re-sampling the agentŌĆÖs action after every update so each critic evaluates the latest policy. We also update agents sequentially (random order) while conditioning each update on the most recent policies of the others. This design avoids conflicting gradients that arise when averaging multi-critic signals, preserves stable learning signals, and enables poli-cies to internalize both local and group/global objectives. To support multi-level guidance, we introduce an actor ar-chitecture that fuses multiple processing paths via a mixture-of-experts style module with cross-attention. This yields richer representations aligned with the hierarchy of critics 1

> arXiv:2602.21680v1 [cs.LG] 25 Feb 2026 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

while remaining locally executable at inference. Empirically, HLC delivers improved performance, high sample efficiency, and robust policies on cooperative, non-communicative, partially observable MARL benchmarks. Across tasks and agent scales, HLC consistently outper-forms single-hierarchy baselinesŌĆöindependent (local only) and centralized (global only)ŌĆöand scales robustly with in-creasing numbers of agents and task difficulty. Video and code are provided in the supplementary material. We summarize our contributions as follows: ŌĆó We propose the Hierarchical Lead Critic (HLC) frame-work, which integrates multi-level perspectives (local, group-level, centralized) for cooperative MARL, bridg-ing the gap between single-perspective optimization approaches. ŌĆó A nested sequential updating scheme that enables sta-ble multi-critic interactions, avoiding gradient conflicts while preserving locality during training. ŌĆó An new actor model architecture utilizing a mixture-of-experts style module with cross-attention, designed for efficient multi-level coordination. ŌĆó Introduction of two novel drone benchmarksŌĆöEscort and SurveillanceŌĆöthat test agent cooperation, scalabil-ity, and performance under partial observability. 

# 2. Related Work 

State-of-the-art MARL methods (Wen et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024; Mahjoub et al., 2025) commonly rely on a single centralized critic to guide the actors during training, while independent versions of single-agent RL methods use lo-cal critics and treat other agents as part of the environment. Even though methods that learn centralized and decentral-ized critics simultaneously exist, they often collapse them into a scalar learning signal as discussed in section 2.2. Cru-cially, algorithms that optimize for multiple critic signals directly have not been explored. In the following section we give an overview of MARL algorithms and introduce methods that learn from multiple critics as these areas are the closest related to HLC conceptually. 

2.1. MARL 

Centralized critics in MARL algorithms like MAD-DPG (Lowe et al., 2017a), COMA (Foerster et al., 2018), MAAC (Iqbal & Sha, 2019), MAT (Wen et al., 2022), HASAC (Liu et al., 2024), SABLE (Mahjoub et al., 2025) are used to mitigate the non-stationarity introduced by agents learning concurrently. MADDPG, as extension of DDPG to multiple agents under the CTDE training paradigm demonstrated the performance improvement of applying centralized critics, but fails to address the multi-agent credit assignment problem. It uses a centralized critic for each agent separately and conditions them on non-local informa-tion, such as observations and actions from other agents or global state information. COMA also employs a centralized critic, but tackles the problem of multi-agent credit assign-ment by subtracting a counterfactual baseline to marginalize out an agentŌĆÖs action. MAAC successfully applied the at-tention mechanism to the concept of centralized critics, and MAT introduces a Transformer based on-policy encoder-decoder architecture with a sequential update scheme based on the Multi-Agent Advantage Decomposition theorem pro-posed in (Kuba et al., 2021; 2022). SABLE combines MAT with retention to improve performance. HASAC, as the current SOTA algorithm in multi-agent con-tinuous control, is based on the MEHAML framework, an extension of HAML (Zhong et al., 2024) to maximum en-tropy Reinforcement Learning (RL). Building on the Multi-Agent Advantage Decomposition theorem, it guarantees theoretical monotonic improvement and derives strong algo-rithms like HAPPO and HATD3. In HASAC, agents learn a stochastic policy and are updated sequentially in random order, with the centralized critic conditioned on the most recent policy from each agent and a global state. After each policy update, a new action is sampled to guide the update of the next agent. HLC leverages the state-of-the-art idea of se-quential updating between agents and the centralized critic learning style as proposed in HASAC, which is discussed in section 4. 

2.2. Learning from Multiple Critics 

The use of multiple critics with a single actor has mostly been explored in the fields of Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning (MTRL) (Mysore et al., 2022; Emukpere et al., 2024) and MARL (Yin et al., 2024; Hook et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2023; Pan & Liu, 2023). These approaches typically combine multiple Q-values or gradients using a weighted average to update the actor. While this method offers good empirical performance with low implementation complexity, it requires tuning the weights, which introduces additional hyperparameters that often need extensive domain expertise. Furthermore, gradients from multiple critics can interfere destructively as they are calculated simultaneously, which can destabilize the training process. To address conflicting gradients, solutions have been proposed with techniques like CoNAL (Yue et al., 2023) that mitigate conflicting gradients during the architecture learning process, or PCGrad (Yu et al., 2020) that performs gradient surgery. In MARL, using multiple centralized critics has been explored by MA-POCA (Ferreira et al., 2021), where a task is split into two new simpler tasks. Each task has a centralized critic that co-ordinates a subgroup of agents, without overlap between the 2Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

groups, with each subgroup receiving task-specific observa-tions and rewards. MA-POCA demonstrated that dividing knowledge among multiple critics can improve learning per-formance. In contrast, HLC learns from multiple critics per actor, which allows optimization from multiple hierarchies. With the HLC sequential updating scheme, after each update a new action is inferenced and evaluated by the next critic. This mirrors the basic idea in actor-critic that critic targets should reflect the most recent policy to maintain stable gra-dients. Thus, HLC avoids the issues of conflicting gradients and the limitations of weighted averaging. 

# 3. Preliminaries 

We consider the cooperative setting of Partially Observ-able Markov Games (POMG) (Littman, 1994) as gener-alization of Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (Dec-POMDP) with individual re-ward functions. A POMG is described by the tuple (N, S, {Oi}, A, {Ri}, P, ╬│ ), where N = {1, ...n } denotes the set of n agents. S refers to the finite set of states and 

{Ai} denotes the action space of agent i Ōłł N , resulting in the joint action space A. Agents only observe their lo-cal observation oit Ōłł Oi instead of the full state, where Oi

is the observation space of agent i. Given a state st Ōłł S

and joint action at Ōłł A, the environment transitions to a new state st+1 Ōłł S by the transition probability function 

P (st+1 | st, a t) : S ├Ś A ├Ś S ŌåÆ [0 , 1] and returns reward signals rit Ōłł Ri : S ├ŚA├ŚS ŌåÆ R. ╬│ Ōłł [0 , 1) is the discount factor. HLC is trained under the CTDE paradigm, allowing access to non-local information during training, whereas at execu-tion time the policies operate using only local observations. 

# 4. Hierarchical Lead Critic 

In this section, we introduce the Hierarchical Lead Critic - a novel sequential updating scheme and architecture for learning from multiple hierarchy levels with actor-critic algorithms. 

4.1. Lead Critics 

We define a Lead Critic as one that evaluates a group of agents. In contrast, a centralized critic always evaluates all agents and a local critic only evaluates its agent. The central-ized and local critic are therefore extreme cases of the Lead Critic concept. Multiple Lead Critics can be organized in parallel or hierarchically to group agents based on principles like locality or functionality. Each Lead Critic incorporates a non-local reward, which is either a distinct group reward or a combination of local rewards, to encourage coordination towards a shared goal. We propose implementing the Lead Critic as a Transformer-Encoder based architecture, option-ally incorporating a feature extractor for observation-action pairs. This design allows handling heterogeneous agents and environments without a global state; instead, we rely on observation-action pairs from agents. A visualization is provided in Appendix B. 

4.2. Sequential Updates 

With HLC, we introduce a novel sequential updating scheme between multiple critics when updating a single actor, as shown in Figure 2. The actor is updated by multiple critics sequentially, ordered by the size of their receptive fields, which refers to the number of agents they evaluate. After each policy update, we inference a new action, ensuring that each critic always evaluates the latest policy. This avoids the problem of conflicting gradients, underlined by a separate discussion comparing our approach with a single averaged update found in Appendix C. After an agent has been up-dated by all relevant critics, the next agent is sequentially updated and as the last update of an agent always focuses on the most cooperative behavior (critic with largest recep-tive field), the next agentŌĆÖs update can rely on the most cooperative version of other agents. This second sequential updating scheme, between agents, follows (Liu et al., 2024). The HLC update procedure, consisting of two sequential up-dating schemes, allows agents to act according to multiple hierarchies, while promoting cooperation. Note that (Liu et al., 2024) can be recovered from HLC by restricting the setup to a single centralized critic.  

> Figure 2. HLC sequential updating scheme for a selected agent with a local critic and a Lead Critic.

4.3. HLC Actor 

We also propose a novel actor architecture, tailored for multi hierarchy optimization, where we combine multiple process-ing paths through the actor with parallel mixture-of-experts style subnetworks and cross-attention. The architecture is shown in Figure 3. After a common feature extractor, multi-ple distinct subnetworks compute different representations of the input. The subnetwork structure in this mixture-of-experts style module is inspired structurally by mixture-of-encoders from MTRL (Sodhani et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 3Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

2023; Hendawy et al., 2024). Note, that it differs by being constrained to local observations of the respective agent and the application in the context of MARL, centralized critics and our sequential update scheme. The subnetwork outputs are embedded and processed with cross attention. The embedding consists of a shared dense layer, mapping to the same latent space, sinusoidal posi-tional encoding and layer norm. We further process the cross-attention output with an inverted bottleneck MLP with ReLU activations, where the hidden dimension is enlarged by a factor of 4. In parallel to this attention path, the base network path provides general processing of the observa-tions and generates the query for the cross-attention. The outputs from the base network path and cross-attention path are concatenated and processed by a SimBa Net (Lee et al., 2024) for action prediction. During backpropagation the base network can be effectively updated through the residual SimBa connection. As we detach the query, there is no gradient from the attention path to the base network, decoupling the base networks learn-ing process. This specific setup allows the HLC actor to act in early training mainly based on the base network and SimBa residual connection, while the cross-attention path and SimBa Net learn to provide more nuanced information for complex emergent cooperative behavior towards later training stages. 

Figure 3. HLC actor. The observation is processed through multi-ple paths that are combined through cross-attention and concatena-tion. 

4.4. HLC with SAC 

We explore SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018; 2019) as the un-derlying actor-critic algorithm for HLC. With a Lead Critic, we learn group Q-values QLCŽł iŌłł{ 1,2} that are conditioned on observation-action pairs o1: m, a 1: m, for a group of m

agents. Details on learning the group Q-values are given in Appendix A. For calculating the actor loss JŽĆk of agent k

from a Lead Critic, we use its entropy coefficient ╬▒k and use the average log probability of agents associated with the current Lead Critic for calculating the entropy: 

JŽĆk (╬Ėk) = E o1: mt Ōł╝Da1: mt Ōł╝ŽĆ1: m╬Ė1: m



HkLC ŌłÆ min  

> jŌłł{ 1,2}

QLC Žłj (o1: mt , a 1: mt )



with HkLC = ╬▒k ┬Ę

"

1

m

> m

X

> l=1

log ŽĆl╬Ėl (alt|olt)

#

(1) Note that all actions originate from the current policies, and gradients are only calculated for agent k. We note that the sequential update scheme for updating agents related to a certain Lead Critic follows (Liu et al., 2024) by conditioning each actorŌĆÖs loss calculation on the most recent policies. In Algorithm 1, we show a training step for HLC and denote statements that apply SAC calculations as (SAC). 

Algorithm 1 Hierarchical Lead Critic - Training step 

Input: Gradient steps G, number of agents n, agent up-date interval: F, policies ŽĆ1: n╬Ė1: n , local critics Q1: nŽĢ1: niŌłł{ 1,2}

with target networks Q1: n

> ┬»ŽĢ1: niŌłł{ 1,2}

, lead critics Q1: mLCŽł iŌłł{ 1,2} with target networks Q1: mLC ┬»ŽłiŌłł{ 1,2}

, replay buffer D; 

for all gradient step g = 1,..., G do 

Sample minibatch B Ōł╝ D;Select actions a1: nt Ōł╝ ŽĆ1: n╬Ė1: n (┬Ę| o1: nt )

Update lead critics (Equation 8); 

if g%F╠Ė = 0 then continue end if 

Draw random permutation P of agents i1: n;

for all k Ōłł P do 

Update local critic Qk with akt (SAC); Update policy ŽĆk╬Ėk with local critic Qk (SAC); Get lead critics LC k associated with agent k; 

for all QkLC Ōłł LC k do 

Select action akt Ōł╝ ŽĆk╬Ėk (┬Ę| okt )

Update policy ŽĆk╬Ėk with QkLC (Equation 1); 

end for 

Select action akt Ōł╝ ŽĆk╬Ėk (┬Ę| okt )

Update entropy of agent k (SAC); 

end for 

Update target networks with polyak averaging; 

end for 

# 5. Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our HLC ap-proach under the setting of cooperative tasks within CTDE, different types of partial observability, and no communi-cation between the agents. The environments used in our evaluations are visualized in Figure 4. We conduct exper-iments on an extended version of the MOMAland Escort 4Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

task (Felten et al., 2024) and a novel Surveillance task, de-scribed in section 5.1, and on the pettingzoo (Terry et al., 2021) version of the MPE (Lowe et al., 2017b) environ-ment SimpleSpread. We compare HLC with the current SOTA in off-policy MARL - HASAC (Liu et al., 2024) and Independent-SAC (ISAC). HASAC and ISAC can be inter-preted as extreme variants of the HLC concept, with either a single centralized critic or only local critics. Therefore, comparing with these baselines offers direct insights into the effectiveness of HLC that learns directly from both local and centralized critics. Training details and hyperparameters can be found in Ap-pendix E.      

> (a) SimpleSpread (b) Escort8
> (c) Surveillance4
> Figure 4. SimpleSpread (a) (Terry et al., 2021), Momaland Escort (b), and Surveillance (c) environments used in our evaluations. In SimpleSpread, black circles are landmarks and purple particles are agents. In Escort8, agent drones (red) escort a target (yellow), while keeping an implicit formation. In Surveillance4, agents ob-serve a target with fixed relative altitude and distribute themselves evenly around the target.

5.1. MOMAland Escort & Surveillance 

We use the Escort task from MOMAland (Felten et al., 2024) version 0.1.1, where simple drones escort a moving target. We extend this version of the Escort task to a fully functional benchmark environment, by introducing proper seeding and randomization, a new scaled reward function and more com-plex target movement. The code, containing all changes, is available in the supplementary material. The observation of each agent is generally constructed by relative positions of the target and other agents. The order is fixed and all agents are observed. Additionally, agents observe their own height and we stack the current and last observation to allow agents to infer movement directions. As partial observability describes the incomplete observa-tion of a state, we consider two types of partial observability in our experiments: relative positions and limiting observa-tions to neighbors. The former is used in the general case as described and the latter additionally limits the observations of other agents to a subset of closest neighbors (results in section 5.3 - Escort8 variants). The action space for each agent is a three-dimensional vector with entries [ŌłÆ1, 1] and actions are applied with a factor of 0.2 directly to the current position of an agent. We build the reward generally from multiple components, each representing a desired behavior. For the Escort task, the reward consists of two components rdistance and rf ormation 

that benefit agents closely following the moving target, while keeping a stable formation. We denote the distance between two entities a and b as d(a, b ), the current agent as agent i and the average position of all agents as center of mass COM . The reward component rdistance incentivizes the agents to move closer to the target and keep the targetsŌĆÖ position close to the center of mass of all agents. 

ridistance = ŌłÆ 12 (d(i, target ) + d(COM, target )) (2) The component rf ormation embodies the cooperative forma-tion objective by rewarding agents for staying at a distance of 1 towards the three closest surrounding agents. This for-mulation allows scalability to larger agent quantities, as in swarm like behavior. 

rif ormation = ŌłÆ 12 (|mean d ŌłÆ 1| + |max d ŌłÆ 1|)

mean d = 13

> nclosest 3

X

> j=1

d(i, j )

max d = max jŌłłnclosest 3 d(i, j )

(3) The components are normalized by the map size and clipped between [ŌłÆ1, 0] , while the average of these components is used to create a scalar reward rscalar for each agent, respectively. A team reward is then calculated as the sum of all scalar rewards: 

riscalar = 0 .5 ┬Ę ridistance + 0 .5 ┬Ę rif ormation (4) 

rteam =

> n

X

> i=0

riscalar (5) 5Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning       

> Table 1. Termination rewards in Escort & Surveillance tasks TASK TERMINATION REWARD
> ESCORT 3-200 ESCORT -200 ESCORT 8-500 SURVEILLANCE 4-200

The episodes terminates early if agent collides with the ground or other agents. The termination rewards in Table 1 then override the scalar reward signal of the colliding agent. Note that with maximum 200 steps per episode (without early termination), an agent receives at worst an episodic return of ŌłÆ200 when finishing the episode without early termination. In addition, we also introduce a novel Surveillance task, where an agent i gets the rewards riheight for keeping a fixed relative altitude to the target, ritorus to distribute agents evenly around the target within a specified distance interval, and rirelH to maintain the same altitude as other agents. We denote the agent altitude as zi, the target altitude as zt, the average altitude of all agents as zavg and the xy-distance between to entities a and b as dxy (a, b ). Agents also receive the reward rif ormation as introduced in the Escort task in Equation 3. 

riheight = ŌłÆ| (zi ŌłÆ zt) ŌłÆ 4|

d = dxy (i, t )

ritorus = ŌłÆ

’Ż▒’Ż┤’Ż▓’Ż┤’Ż│

1.0 ŌłÆ d if d < 1.0

d ŌłÆ 2 if d > 2.00 else 

zd = |zi ŌłÆ zavg |

rirelH =

(

ŌłÆzd if zd > 0.10

(6) Following the Escort task, we normalize each component by the map size and clip them between -1 and 0. Also on collision, agents only receive the termination reward. From these reward components we calculate the two objectives: 

rilocal = 0 .5 ┬Ę riheight + 0 .5 ┬Ę ritorus 

ricooperation = 0 .5 ┬Ę rirelH + 0 .5 ┬Ę rif ormation 

(7) As in the Escort task, compare Equation 4, a scalar reward is calculated as average of rilocal and ricooperation and the team reward is calculated with Equation 5. A detailed description of general changes to MOMAland is given in Appendix E. 

5.2. Experimental Results Escort3 and Escort8 

On the Escort tasks, HLC generally outperforms both HASAC and ISAC in final performance and sample effi-ciency (see Figures 5a and 5b). The strong performance of ISAC demonstrates that local rewards are important to progress in these tasks. On the other hand, HASAC strug-gles on Escort3 and degrades to termination avoidance on Escort8, showcasing that solely relying on a global reward can be troublesome (episode lengths are provided in Fig-ure 5d and 5e). HLC manages to combine the local reward benefits with improved cooperative behavior to achieve un-matched performance. It effectively integrates the global reward without degrading the performance as seen with HASAC. We provide ablations on the death penalty and partial ob-servability settings of the Escort8 task in section 5.3. 

Surveillance4 

On the Surveillance task, a similar pattern to the Escort tasks can be observed. A good individual performance of an agent is vital to an effective performance of the group. HLC manages again to leverage the individual and global components to achieve unmatched performance and sam-ple efficiency, while ISAC offers limited performance and HASAC struggles to solve the task. 

Simple Spread 

On SimpleSpread agents are mainly rewarded based on the global objective, while local penalties are introduced for collisions. Despite this setup, HLC exhibits competitive performance compared to HASAC as seen in Figure 5f. This shows that HLC can also handle sparse local reward setups and not degrade to a worse performance as seen with ISAC. 

5.3. Ablation Study HLC components 

We investigate different components of HLC, consisting of the actor architecture and the averaged log probability (see Equation 1). For the architecture, we evaluate HLC-Simple. A variant, where we swap the HLC actor with a simple 2-layer MLP with ReLU activations, mirroring the HASAC and ISAC actor setup. We report the results in Figure 6b. HLC-Simple outperforms HASAC and ISAC, showcasing that the pro-posed sequential updating scheme and hierarchical setup of HLC increase the performance already by themselves and verifies the effectiveness of leveraging both local and central-ized rewards during training. Only the full HLC setup, with advanced actor architecture, achieves better performance. For the averaged log probability, we introduce the Single Logp variants, that employ the HASAC setup of only using each agentsŌĆÖ log probability in the actor loss. We report the 6Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning            

> (a) Escort3 (b) Escort8 (c) Surveillance4
> (d) Escort3 - Episode length (e) Escort8 - Episode length (f) SimpleSpread
> Figure 5. Performance of HLC compared to HASAC and ISAC on the Escort tasks with episode lengths, Surveillance task and SimpleSpread.

results for HLC-SingleLogp and HLC-Simple-SingleLogp in Figure 6e. A consistent trend emerges, HLC-Simple out-performs HLC-Simple-SingleLogp and HLC outperforms HLC-SingleLogp. The averaged log probability setup pro-duces better performance in both variants consistently. The best performance is still achieved by the full HLC setup, combining the proposed sequential updating scheme, the HLC-actor and the averaged log probabilities. 

Escort8 variants 

We provide additional results on two variants of the Escort8 task to evaluate the robustness of HLC and the baselines to partial observability and a difficult early termination op-tima. For the partial observability setup, we reduce the obser-vations of each agent to only the relative positions of the closest agents and the relative target position. We report results for agents only observing the two and four closest agents respectively. Also under partial observability HLC outperforms the baselines. To increase the difficulty in respect to early termination optima we purposely reduce the death penalty on termina-tion from 500 to 320 in the Escort8 task. This results in a difficult local optimum, where agents can try to collide as soon as possible to force early termination. Imagine a single agent colliding with the ground in the first step of an episode. This directly terminates the episode and results in a global reward of roughly ŌłÆ320 , including other agents contributions, which are close to zero. Such a global reward can be falsely attributed to all agents evenly achieving a comparably good episodic return of ŌłÆ40 each. Especially in early training a strategy of converging to the local opti-mum of instant termination can be favorable for the agents. We report the performance in Figure 6a and episode length in Figure 6d. Notably, HASAC quickly falls into the lo-cal optimum of early termination, while HLC retains its strong performance and is not negatively impacted due to its reliance on local and global rewards. 

Additional results 

We provide additional results and ablations in Appendix D, consisting of different HASAC configurations on Escort3, results on Escort5 and results for increasing gradient steps on HASAC and ISAC in Escort8 to investigate if the sample efficiency of the baseline models can easily be increased. To summarize, increasing the gradient steps on HASAC and ISAC does not translate to an improvement in performance, which shows that HLC has the unique advantage under the investigated algorithms of translating additional gradient updates into an increased sample efficiency. On the Escort5 task HLC again outperforms the baselines showcasing its capability of handling different group sizes effectively. We provide a video in the supplementary material, showcas-ing the performance of HLC on the Escort3, Escort8 and Surveillance4 tasks as detailed in Appendix F. 

# 6. Conclusion 

In this work, we propose HLC as novel actor-critic MARL algorithm that demonstrates the benefits of explicitly learn-7Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning            

> (a) Escort8 - Death 320 (b) Escort8 - HLC-Simple (c) Escort8 - Partial 2
> (d) Escort8 - Death 320 - Episode length (e) Escort8 - SingleLogp (f) Escort8 - Partial 4
> Figure 6. Ablation Study on HLC components and Escort 8 variants.

ing from multiple perspectives on different hierarchy levels. We demonstrate superior performance and sample efficiency of HLC on cooperative, non-communicative MARL tasks with partial observability. With HLC, we introduce a novel sequential updating scheme between critics that guide the agent to multi hierarchy optimization. In combination with HLC, we propose a novel actor architecture, which encodes observations in mixture-of-experts style subnetworks and uses multiple paths for acting effectively. Furthermore, we introduce the Lead Critic as concept of critics that evaluate groups of agents. A Lead Critic evaluat-ing a single agent can be interpreted as a local critic, while a Lead Critic evaluating all agents is a centralized critic. The proposed Lead Critic Transformer-Encoder based architec-ture focuses on effectively combining local observations and actions from a group of agents to guide the group of agents during learning. With the general design of HLC, it can be applied to heterogeneous agents, cooperative environments with partial observability and does not require access to com-munication between agents. It enables agents to focus on local optimization, while fostering global (or group-level) cooperation. HLC performs competitive against the current SOTA on a common MARL benchmark and outperforms the SOTA on the novel Escort and Surveillance tasks, while displaying high sample efficiency and robustness to partial observability without communication. It shows scalability to larger number of agents, while keeping stability and per-formance. While HLC outperforms the baselines, the sequential up-dating scheme increases the training time as the inference time remains comparable. Future works include ideas of parameter sharing between agents and partial parameter sharing between subnetworks to reduce the computational resources. Additionally, exploring the applicability of HLC in Multi-Objective MARL might have relevant potential. 

# Acknowledgements 

This research was partially funded by the Bavarian State Ministry for Economic Affairs, Regional Development and Energy under Grant DIK0281. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Cheng, G., Dong, L., Cai, W., and Sun, C. Multi-task reinforcement learning with attention-based mixture of experts. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 8(6): 3812ŌĆō3819, 2023. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2023.3271445. Emukpere, D., Wu, B., Perez, J., and Renders, J.-M. Slim: Skill learning with multiple critics. In 2024 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pp. 9161ŌĆō9167, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ICRA57147.2024. 10610691. Felten, F., Ucak, U., Azmani, H., Peng, G., R ┬©opke, W., 8Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Baier, H., Mannion, P., Roijers, D. M., Terry, J. K., Talbi, E.-G., Danoy, G., Now ┬┤e, A., and R ╦śadulescu, R. Momaland: A set of benchmarks for multi-objective multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2407.16312 .Ferreira, T., Clua, E., and Kohwalter, T. C. Centralized critic per knowledge for cooperative multi-agent game environments. In 2021 20th Brazilian Symposium on Computer Games and Digital Entertainment (SBGames) ,pp. 39ŌĆō48, 2021. doi: 10.1109/SBGames54170.2021. 00015. Foerster, J. N., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and Whiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirtieth Innovative Appli-cations of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Eighth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence , AAAIŌĆÖ18/IAAIŌĆÖ18/EAAIŌĆÖ18. AAAI Press, 2018. ISBN 978-1-57735-800-8. Fujimoto, S., van Hoof, H., and Meger, D. Address-ing function approximation error in actor-critic meth-ods. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , pp. 1587ŌĆō1596. PMLR, 10ŌĆō15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ fujimoto18a.html .Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 1861ŌĆō1870. PMLR, 10ŌĆō15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v80/haarnoja18b.html .Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Hartikainen, K., Tucker, G., Ha, S., Tan, J., Kumar, V., Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic algorithms and ap-plications, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1812.05905 .Hendawy, A., Peters, J., and DŌĆÖEramo, C. Multi-task rein-forcement learning with mixture of orthogonal experts. In LEARNING REPRESENTATIONS. INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE. 12TH 2024. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR-2024) . International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. Hook, J., Silva, V. D., and Kondoz, A. Deep multi-critic network for accelerating policy learning in multi-agent en-vironments. Neural Networks , 128:97ŌĆō106, 2020. ISSN 0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2020.04. 023. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0893608020301519 .Iqbal, S. and Sha, F. Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Chaudhuri, K. and Salakhutdinov, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 2961ŌĆō2970, Long Beach, California, USA, 09ŌĆō15 Jun 2019. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr. press/v97/iqbal19a.html .Jiang, K., Liu, W., Wang, Y., Dong, L., and Sun, C. Credit assignment in heterogeneous multi-agent reinforcement learning for fully cooperative tasks. Applied Intelligence ,53(23):29205ŌĆō29222, October 2023. ISSN 1573-7497. doi: 10.1007/s10489-023-04866-0. URL http://dx. doi.org/10.1007/s10489-023-04866-0 .Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic op-timization, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1412.6980 .Kraemer, L. and Banerjee, B. Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for decentralized planning. Neu-rocomput. , 190(C):82ŌĆō94, May 2016. ISSN 0925-2312. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2016.01.031. URL https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2016.01.031 .Kuba, J. G., Wen, M., Meng, L., Gu, S., Zhang, H., Mguni, D. H., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Settling the variance of multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ŌĆÖ21, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2021. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713845393. Kuba, J. G., Chen, R., Wen, M., Wen, Y., Sun, F., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2022. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=EcGGFkNTxdJ .Lee, H., Hwang, D., Kim, D., Kim, H., Tai, J. J., Subrama-nian, K., Wurman, P. R., Choo, J., Stone, P., and Seno, T. Simba: Simplicity bias for scaling up parameters in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09754 ,2024. Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning, 2019. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971 .Littman, M. L. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , 1994. URL https://api. semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8108362 .9Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Liu, J., Zhong, Y., Hu, S., Fu, H., FU, Q., Chang, X., and Yang, Y. Maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent rein-forcement learning. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=tmqOhBC4a5 .Liu, L., Jiang, H., He, P., Chen, W., Liu, X., Gao, J., and Han, J. On the variance of the adaptive learning rate and beyond. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=rkgz2aEKDr .Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mor-datch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Proceedings of the 31st In-ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPSŌĆÖ17, pp. 6382ŌĆō6393, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017a. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964. Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mor-datch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NIPS) , 2017b. Mahjoub, O., Abramowitz, S., De Kock, R. J., Khlifi, W., Toit, S. V. D., Daniel, J., Nessir, L. B., Beyers, L., For-manek, J. C., Clark, L., and Pretorius, A. Sable: aperformant, efficient and scalable sequence model for MARL. In Singh, A., Fazel, M., Hsu, D., Lacoste-Julien, S., Berkenkamp, F., Maharaj, T., Wagstaff, K., and Zhu, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 42579ŌĆō42614. PMLR, 13ŌĆō19 Jul 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v267/mahjoub25a.html .Mysore, S., Cheng, G., Zhao, Y., Saenko, K., and Wu, M. Multi-critic actor learning: Teaching RL policies to act with style. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=rJvY_5OzoI .Pan, W. and Liu, C. A graph-based soft actor critic approach in multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing. Int. J. Comput. Commun. Control , 18, 2023. URL https://api.semanticscholar. org/CorpusID:256756051 .Parisotto, E., Song, H. F., Rae, J. W., Pascanu, R., Gul-cehre, C., Jayakumar, S. M., Jaderberg, M., Kaufman, R. L., Clark, A., Noury, S., Botvinick, M. M., Heess, N., and Hadsell, R. Stabilizing transformers for reinforce-ment learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICMLŌĆÖ20. JMLR.org, 2020. Sodhani, S., Zhang, A., and Pineau, J. Multi-task reinforcement learning with context-based representa-tions. In Meila, M. and Zhang, T. (eds.), Proceed-ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 9767ŌĆō9779. PMLR, 18ŌĆō24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v139/sodhani21a.html .Terry, J., Black, B., Grammel, N., Jayakumar, M., Hari, A., Sullivan, R., Santos, L. S., Dieffendahl, C., Horsch, C., Perez-Vicente, R., et al. Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:15032ŌĆō15043, 2021. Wen, M., Kuba, J. G., Lin, R., Zhang, W., Wen, Y., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ŌĆÖ22, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2022. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088. Yin, H., Wang, C., Yan, C., Xiang, X., Cai, B., and Wei, C. Deep reinforcement learning with multicritic td3 for decentralized multirobot path planning. IEEE Transac-tions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems , 16(4): 1233ŌĆō1247, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2024.3368055. Yu, T., Kumar, S., Gupta, A., Levine, S., Hausman, K., and Finn, C. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ŌĆÖ20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713829546. Yue, Z., Zhang, Y., and Liang, J. Learning conflict-noticed architecture for multi-task learning. In Proceed-ings of the Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence and Thirty-Fifth Conference on Inno-vative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Thir-teenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence , AAAIŌĆÖ23/IAAIŌĆÖ23/EAAIŌĆÖ23. AAAI Press, 2023. ISBN 978-1-57735-880-0. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i9. 26312. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai. v37i9.26312 .Zhong, Y., Kuba, J. G., Feng, X., Hu, S., Ji, J., and Yang, Y. Heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 25(1), January 2024. ISSN 1532-4435. 10 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

# A. HLC with SAC - Details 

We condition our SAC Lead Critics on their respective group ( m agents) observations o1: m and actions a1: m. Following SAC, we learn two Lead Critics QLCŽł iŌłł{ 1,2} with clipped double Q-learning (Fujimoto et al., 2018) to reduce overestimation bias and target networks QLC ┬»ŽłiŌłł{ 1,2} to stabilize training (Lillicrap et al., 2019), per group of agents. For the lead critic entropy, we follow (Liu et al., 2024), where the centralized critic learns its own entropy coefficient. With a sampled minibatch 

B Ōł╝ D containing (o1: mt , a 1: mt , r t, o 1: mt+1 ), we calculate the Lead Critic loss: 

LQLC Žłi

= EBŌł╝D , a 1: mt+1 Ōł╝ŽĆ1: m╬Ė1: m



QLC Žłi (o1: mt , a 1: mt ) ŌłÆ yt

2

yt = rLC t + ╬│



min  

> jŌłł{ 1,2}

QLC ┬»Žłj (o1: mt+1 , a 1: mt+1 ) + HLC (o1: mt+1 , a 1: mt+1 )



with HLC (o1: mt+1 , a 1: mt+1 ) = ŌłÆ╬▒LC ┬Ę

> m

X

> l=1

log ŽĆl╬Ėl (alt+1 |olt+1 )

(8) 

# B. Transformer-Encoder based Lead Critic 

We design the Lead Critic generally as a Transformer-Encoder based network with a 2-layer MLP prediction head with ReLU activation. Each agentsŌĆÖ observation and action are embedded or processed by a feature extractor before being given to the Transformer-Encoder. This separate processing allows handling heterogeneous observation and action spaces. We follow (Parisotto et al., 2020) in repositioning the layer norm in the input stream of the Transformer-Encoder submodules for improved stabilization and direct gradient flow from output to input. In Figure 7, this Lead Critic structure is visualized for handling two agents. Hyperparameters for Transformer-Encoder based Lead Critics used in the experiments can be found in Table 4. 

Figure 7. Transformer-Encoder based Lead Critic grouping two agents 

# C. Sequential Updates 

We provide a discussion about the differences between the HLC sequential updating scheme and a combined/averaged update strategy for updating an actor from multiple critics. In the HLC actor update, we use multiple critics to update a single actor and inference a new action after each policy update (see Figure 2). Therefore, the next update can adapt to the already updated policy. In comparison, when calculating updates from multiple critics simultaneously and averaging them, the critics cannot adapt to the updates proposed by each other. This can result in conflicting gradients and HLC avoids this problem by design. We compare HLC with an averaged update version termed HLC-Average, where each update is still calculated separately, but the average of gradients is used to update the actor instead of sequential updates. No other components were altered. We report results in Figure 8. In general, the HLC-Average variant learns slower compared to HLC and with higher variance. These findings support the argument of conflicting gradients in HLC-Average that negatively impact the training with 11 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning     

> (a) Escort8 (b) Surveillance4
> Figure 8. HLC compared to HLC-Average

instability and less effective updates. Additionally, on Surveillance4 (Figure 8b), HLC clearly outperforms HLC-Average in final performance, showcasing the benefits of the sequential updates. Notably, HLC-Average still outperforms the single hierarchy baselines. This validates the underlying HLC concept of leveraging critics from multiple hierarchies to effectively combine local optimization with global cooperation. 

# D. Additional Results 

In this section, we show the results of ablations regarding different configurations of the SOTA baseline HASAC on Escort3 task, results for the Escort5 task and a comparison for HASAC and ISAC, when increasing the gradient steps on the Escort8 task. We denote the combination of X ŌĆØgradient stepsŌĆØ with a value of Y for the ŌĆØactor update intervalŌĆØ as GXIY. The original HASAC (Liu et al., 2024) setup with centralized information for actor and critic is denoted as HASAC-Global: ŌĆó HASAC-G4I2, ŌĆó HASAC-GlobalCritic-G1I1, centralized MLP critic with concatenated observations ŌĆó HASAC-GlobalCritic-G4I2, centralized MLP critic with concatenated observations ŌĆó HASAC-Global-G1I1, concatenated observations as actor and centralized MLP critic input 

HASAC variants As shown in Figure 9a, employing the Lead Critic architecture as proposed with HLC on HASAC results in consistently better performance compared to a global state given to a centralized MLP critic. Note that even when conditioning the HASAC actor directly on a global state, HLC still outperforms it significantly. In addition, scaling the gradient steps to the HLC setup with 4 gradient steps and an actor update interval of 2 does not reveal itself as effective, moreover it destabilizes the learning process. This showcases that HLC, with its multi perspective optimization, can effectively exploit low amounts of samples. 

Escort5 On the Escort5 task HLC also outperforms the baselines with a similar pattern as observed for Escort3 and Escort8. 

Escort8 - Baseline gradient steps For comparison, we also ablate increasing the gradient steps for HASAC and ISAC on the Escort8 task with death penalty 500. The increase of gradient steps does not transfer to an improved performance for the baselines. Moreover it degrades the performance and slows the learning process. 

# E. Experimental Details 

E.1. Experimental Setup 

All experiments were conducted with 5 seeds and we report the mean performance with 95% confidence interval. 12 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning            

> (a) Escort3 - HASAC variants (b) Escort5 (c) Escort8 - Gradient steps
> (d) Escort3 -HASAC variants- Episode length (e) Escort5 - Episode length (f) Escort8 - Gradient steps - Episode length
> Figure 9. Additional results for HASAC variants on Escort3, Escort5 and increasing gradient steps for HASAC and ISAC on Escort8.

E.1.1. S IMPLE SPREAD 

In SimpleSpread (Lowe et al., 2017b), agents are globally rewarded based on the sum of minimum distances from all agents to landmarks and locally penalized for collisions with other agents. The final reward is an average of global and local rewards. Agents observe their position, velocity, relative position, and velocities of other agents and landmarks. For constructing a cooperative reward, we follow (Liu et al., 2024) by summing the rewards of all agents. We give this cooperative reward to centralized critics in HLC and HASAC, while local critics from HLC and ISAC receive the default reward. Each algorithm is trained for 2 million environment steps and evaluated every 20000 environment steps. E.1.2. M OMALAND ESCORT AND SURVEILLANCE 

In the proposed Escort and Surveillance tasks, each algorithm is trained for 500 thousand environment steps and evaluated every 2000 environment steps. Reward calculation can be found in 5.1. Here, we also provide the list of changes to MOMAland (Felten et al., 2024) version 0.1.1. The code is provided in the supplementary material and the folder containing the extended environments are denoted as ŌĆØescort customŌĆØ and ŌĆØsurveillance customŌĆØ, with the modified base environment file as crazyRL base custom.pyŌĆØ. We introduced: ŌĆó Seeding ŌĆó Agents and target positions randomized on resets ŌĆó Target movement with multiple random direction changes per episode ŌĆó Increased map size ŌĆó Relative position observations of other agents and the target ŌĆó Only ego height observation, no xy information ŌĆó Normalized reward components and scaled termination penalty For all tasks we use a map size of 8 and 4 random target direction changes within an episode. We normalize our rewards with the map size and clip them between [-1,0] as described in Equation 9 with rix representing any reward component. 13 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

rix = clip ( rix

map size ) , ŌłÆ1, 0) (9) 

E.2. Training Details and Hyperparameters  

> Table 2. Common hyperparameters in all environments for all algorithms

Hyperparameter Value 

Parallel environments P 10 Replay buffer size 1e6 Discount factor 0.99 Polyak coefficient 0.005 Adam ŽĄ 1e-5 Batch size 256 ┬Ę P 

> Table 3. Environment specific hyperparameters for all algorithms. With EscortX for all Escort tasks.

Hyperparameter EscortX SimpleSpread 

Train interval 20 50 Total env steps 5e5 2e6 Warmup steps 5e3 1e4 Observation history 2 1n-step 5 2Actor lr 3e-4 5e-4 Critic lr 1e-3 5e-4 Lead Critic lr 1e-3 5e-4 Auto alpha True False Alpha lr 3e-4 -Alpha init 1.0 0.2 We report the common hyperparameters for all algorithms in Table 2 and Table 3. Specific hyperparameters for our approach HLC are reported in Table 4. For HASAC, we use a 2-layer MLP actor with hidden dimension 256 and ReLU activations and for variants with a global MLP critic, we also employ a 2-layer MLP network. For HASAC ablations, the changes to this setup are described at the respective experiments. The basic HASAC hyperparameters are given in Table 5. In ISAC, we also use a 2-layer MLP for actor and critic with hidden dimension 256 and ReLU activations. Both actor and critic only receive the agentsŌĆÖ local observations (and actions) as input. ISAC hyperparameters are given in Table 6. In general, the chosen hyperparameters are based on common values found in the literature and we have purposely avoided tuning HLC to specific environment conditions. 

# F. Video results 

We provide videos of agents on the Escort3, Escort8 (death penalty 500) and Surveillance4 tasks within the supplementary material for HLC, HASAC and ISAC. Figure 10 shows an exemplary frame of the provided video. Note that in the video we show only 5 episodes for demonstration purposes. 14 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning  

> Table 4. HLC specific hyperparameters in all environments

Hyperparameter Value 

Actor network type HLC Actor Actor optimizer RAdam (Liu et al., 2020) Actor optimizer weight decay 1e-5 Subnetworks 2Subnetwork hidden sizes [256, 256] Subnetwork activation ReLU Base network hidden sizes [256, 256] Base network activation ReLU Actor attention embedding dim 128 Actor attention heads 4Critic network type MLP Critic hidden sizes [256, 256] Critic activations ReLU Critic optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) Lead critic network type Transformer-Encoder Lead critic optimizer RAdam (Liu et al., 2020) Lead critic optimizer weight decay 1e-5 Lead critic embedding dim 128 Lead critic number Transformer blocks 2Lead critic attention heads 4Lead critic Transformer feedforward dim 512 Gradient steps 4Gradient steps (SimpleSpread) 2Actor update interval 2 

> Table 5. Common hyperparameters for HASAC

Hyperparameter Value 

Actor network type MLP Actor optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) Actor hidden sizes [256, 256] Lead critic network type Transformer-Encoder Lead critic optimizer RAdam (Liu et al., 2020) Lead critic optimizer weight decay 1e-5 Lead critic embedding dim 128 Lead critic number Transformer blocks 2Lead critic attention heads 4Lead critic Transformer feedforward dim 256 Gradient steps 1Actor update interval 115 Hierarchical Lead Critic based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning  

> Table 6. Common hyperparameters for ISAC

Hyperparameter Value 

Actor network type MLP Actor optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) Actor hidden sizes [256, 256] Critic network type MLP Critic hidden sizes [256, 256] Critic activations ReLU Critic optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) Gradient steps 1Actor update interval 1 

> Figure 10. Single frame of video provided in the supplementary material

16